We'll begin our discussion
of Java Streams Internals
by focusing on the splitting
and combining phases.
One of the most important
things to understand in streams
is to know what aspects you can
change, the programmer who uses
streams, and what
aspects are simply fixed,
and you have to just
learn to live with.
Recall the different
phases of a stream.
There are three phases.
The first phase is
the splitting phase,
which uses a Spliterator
to convert a data
source into a stream.
The second phase is
the applying phase,
which processes the
elements in the stream.
We've talked about before
that a sequential stream
runs things in one thread.
But a parallel
stream can actually
process all of its elements
simultaneously in parallel
and the common ForkJoinPool.
And then the third
and final phase
is the combined phase, which
triggers intermediate operation
processing, and will create
a single so-called reduced
result.
Knowing which of
these three phases
you can change and control
and how to control them
is very important, especially
if you start programming
with parallel streams,
where you want
to be able to get
the maximum out
of your systems performance.
For now, we're
just going to focus
on sequential streams
and the internals
of sequential streams, covering
splitting and combining.
And then later, when we
talk about parallel streams,
we'll talk further about how
these different phases work.
And we'll also spend more time
covering the phase of applying,
which is the interesting
part that involves
the common ForkJoinPool.
Java's splitting and combining
mechanisms are often invisible.
They are something like a
ninja, where you can't see it
when it does its work properly.
All Java collections come
with predefined Spliterators.
And these predefined
Spliterators are actually
defined, and the core
interface is part
of the collection interface.
And if you take a
look at collection,
you can see that
there's actually
a Spliterator method which
has a default behavior, which,
of course, can be
overridden as needed
in various implementations
of the collection interface.
You can also see, if
you look carefully,
that the Spliterator interface
is used by various methods that
are also defined in collector--
in collection, rather.
So for example,
if you take a look
and see the stream method
which converts something
into a sequential
stream, the way it works
is it calls
StreamSupport.stream,
calling the Spliterator
method to get a Spliterator,
and passing the false flag,
which goes ahead and makes
a sequential stream.
And we'll talk about
that more later as well.
Java also provides various
predefined collector factory
methods in the
Collectors utility class.
And so as you can see
here, we have a bunch
of different methods here.
We have the toList method.
We have the toSet method.
There's a toCollection method.
There's a toMap method.
We'll take a look at some of
these as we go further along
and see other ways about
how they work under the hood
and so on.
But for right now, just
be aware that you've
got a lot of mechanisms
out of the box
that are useful for almost
all your programming
needs with streams.
However, there are
some contexts where
what you get out of the
box isn't really quite
what you need.
For example, you may have
your own user-defined data
structures that don't come
with Spliterators until you
implement them.
They may be above
and beyond what
is provided in the Java
collections framework.
Likewise, you may have
various use cases,
where you have to be
able to put data together
in interesting ways.
So it's possible to customize
the behavior of splitting
and combining as
long as you know
the proper interfaces to use,
and how to integrate them back
into the Java Streams framework.
In particular, there's an
interface called Spliterator,
which is a generic interface.
And it's used to traverse and
partition elements of a source.
And as you can see here, there's
a number of methods there,
like tryAdvance and
forEachRemaining,
and so on and so forth.
And, of course, trySplit,
which is something
we're going to talk about when
we talk about parallel streams.
So if you need to implement
your own Spliterator,
then you typically do that
by either implementing
the Spliterator interface,
or essentially extending
something called the
abstract Spliterator class.
Likewise, there's also
a Collector interface.
And this defines a
number of methods
that are used to accumulate
input elements in a stream
into something known as a
mutable result container.
And not surprisingly,
the Collector interface
is used in conjunction with
the collect terminal operation.
So as you can see
here, we have a bunch
of methods like supplier,
accumulator, combiner,
finisher, and so on.
And these are all
basically factory methods
that create the appropriate
data types that are used
by the Collector to do its job.
Not surprisingly, the
predefined collectors
that come out of the box for
collecting into lists or sets
also implement the
Collector interface.
But because it's provided
as a public interface,
you can come along and define
your implementations as well.
And then they're very
simple to connect
into the streams framework.